README.md, before:

# Pytropos #

Experimental python linter/interpreter to check for correctness of tensor/matrix/arrays
operations used in numpy.

Currently it does nothing particularly useful (it handles just a couple of cases). Please,
check this page out periodically, Pytropos will eventually do something useful.

## What is this? ##

Pytropos is a Python 3 (pseudo)Interpreter/Linter/Static Analyser based on the ideas of
Reflection (Ortin et al., 2015), Gradual Typing (Siek and Taha, 2006), and Abstract
Domains (from Abstract Interpretation (Cousot and Radhia, 1977)).

Once you've installed Pytropos, you can check a python file with `pytropos <file>` (or
`paver run <file>` in development mode).

Pytropos follows the execution model of Python but all interactions with the user and
world are faked. The only thing Pytropos prints is a list of warnings. A warning is
a Python Exception that Pytropos found when running the code. The Exception is warrantied
to (eventually) happen if the code is run in the regular Python interpreter.

The following piece of code is warrantied to fail in Python 3:

~~~python
i = 3
x = 0.0
y = i / x  # division by zero
x += y - i
print(x)
~~~

Running the code in Pytropos gives us:

    > pytropos excode.py
    excode.py:3:4: E001 ZeroDivisionError: float division by zero

The main idea is for Pytropos to be able to catch this and many other errors that could
happen when a piece of code is run.

A more complex (working) example:

~~~python
import numpy as np

a = np.zeros( (10,6) )

m = 4 + 1
n = 0 + 2

if m == 5:
    n = 1
else:
    m = 6

b = np.ones( (m,n) )
res = np.dot(a, b)  # fails here

print(res)

var = True

if var:
    b = np.zeros( (3, 11) )
    res = np.dot(b, a)  # fails here

print(res)
~~~

and pytropos detects there's an error in the shape of some `numpy` arrays and informs us.

    > pytropos excode2.py
    excode2.py:14:6: E504 6 != 5. Matrices are not compatible for multiplication. The second dimension of the first array `6` isn't equal to the first dimension of the second array `5`
    excode2.py:22:10: E504 11 != 10. Matrices are not compatible for multiplication. The second dimension of the first array `11` isn't equal to the first dimension of the second array `10`


### The Plan ###

The plan is to support a moderate amount of Python characteristics (variables, functions,
if branching, loops, tuples, lists, and a few others) together with the implementation of
a mock/fake numpy library.

### ToDo List ###

- [x] Basic support of `int`, `float` and `bool` variables, and their operations (An
      abstract domain definition)
- [x] Handling of undefined, local, nonlocal, and global variables
- [ ] Handling nondeterminism inside an `if` branch (what if we don't know the truth value
      of the question made to `if`) (almost complete)
- [ ] Basic support of `numpy` arrays (in progress)
- [x] Basic Function support (only `*args`)
- [ ] Basic support for `list`s
- [ ] Basic support for `tuple`s
- [ ] Basic support of `numpy` operations (addition, multiplication, ... requires checking
      broadcasting)
- [ ] Basic support for `class`es (objects are consider all immutable)
- [ ] Full Function support (`*args`, `**kargs`, `kwonlyargs` and other stuff)
- [ ] Full support of `int`, `float` and `bool` variables, and their operations
- [ ] Full support of a subset `numpy` functions

## Why is this all written in python 3.6? ##

Pytropos only works with Python 3.6 or newer. But, why not Python 2?

It's time people to move on! Python 2 is an amazing tool, but it was announced some many
years now that the core team will stop supporting it in some years. Now we have Python 3,
but it seems that too much code is still written to work in Python 2 too, which means that
we cannot write in the style of Python 3. Well, let's move on.

PS: supporting two Python versions is a lot of work! Python 2 and Python 3 differ in a lot
of subtle ways: scopes, primitive data types, behaivour of builtin functions, ...

## Development ##

Create and enter enviroment:

    python3 -m venv venv-env3
    source venv-env3/bin/activate

Install requirements:

    pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
    pip install -r git_requirements.txt
    pip install argparse

## Run tests ##

    paver test_all

We use [hypothesis](hypothesis) for property-based testing. If you want to see the
statistics of the tests generated by hypothesis run:

    paver test --hypothesis-show-statistics

[hypothesis]: https://github.com/HypothesisWorks/hypothesis/

To see test coverage of code:

    paver coverage

## Contributing ##

This project is part of the work for my master thesis.

You're welcome to help, I'll be glad to hear some other voices about this project.

## References ##

Ortin, Francisco, J. Baltasar G. Perez-Schofield, and Jose M. Redondo. 2015. "Towards a
  Static Type Checker for Python." In European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming
  (ECOOP), Scripts to Programs Workshop, STOP, 15:1–2.

Siek, Jeremy G., and Walid Taha. 2006. "Gradual Typing for Functional Languages." In
  Scheme and Functional Programming Workshop, 6:81–92.

Cousot, Patrick, and Radhia Cousot. 1977. "Abstract Interpretation: A Unified Lattice
  Model for Static Analysis of Programs by Construction or Approximation of Fixpoints." In
  Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming
  Languages, 238–252. POPL ’77. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
  https://doi.org/10.1145/512950.512973.

Commit message:

Updating `docs` and adding git hook to generate docs automatically

README.md, after:

# Pytropos #

Experimental python linter/interpreter to check for correctness of tensor/matrix/arrays
operations used in numpy.

Currently it does nothing particularly useful (it handles just a couple of cases). Please,
check this page out periodically, Pytropos will eventually do something useful.

## What is this? ##

Pytropos is a Python 3 (pseudo)Interpreter/Linter/Static Analyser based on the ideas of
Reflection (Ortin et al., 2015), Gradual Typing (Siek and Taha, 2006), and Abstract
Domains (from Abstract Interpretation (Cousot and Radhia, 1977)).

Once you've installed Pytropos, you can check a python file with `pytropos <file>` (or
`paver run <file>` in development mode).

Pytropos follows the execution model of Python but all interactions with the user and
world are faked. The only thing Pytropos prints is a list of warnings. A warning is
a Python Exception that Pytropos found when running the code. The Exception is warrantied
to (eventually) happen if the code is run in the regular Python interpreter.

The following piece of code is warrantied to fail in Python 3:

~~~python
i = 3
x = 0.0
y = i / x  # division by zero
x += y - i
print(x)
~~~

Running the code in Pytropos gives us:

    > pytropos excode.py
    excode.py:3:4: E001 ZeroDivisionError: float division by zero

The main idea is for Pytropos to be able to catch this and many other errors that could
happen when a piece of code is run.

A more complex (working) example:

~~~python
import numpy as np

a = np.zeros( (10,6) )

m = 4 + 1
n = 0 + 2

if m == 5:
    n = 1
else:
    m = 6

b = np.ones( (m,n) )
res = np.dot(a, b)  # fails here

print(res)

var = True

if var:
    b = np.zeros( (3, 11) )
    res = np.dot(b, a)  # fails here

print(res)
~~~

and pytropos detects there's an error in the shape of some `numpy` arrays and informs us.

    > pytropos excode2.py
    excode2.py:14:6: E504 6 != 5. Matrices are not compatible for multiplication. The second dimension of the first array `6` isn't equal to the first dimension of the second array `5`
    excode2.py:22:10: E504 11 != 10. Matrices are not compatible for multiplication. The second dimension of the first array `11` isn't equal to the first dimension of the second array `10`


### The Plan ###

The plan is to support a moderate amount of Python characteristics (variables, functions,
if branching, loops, tuples, lists, and a few others) together with the implementation of
a mock/fake numpy library.

### ToDo List ###

- [x] Basic support of `int`, `float` and `bool` variables, and their operations (An
      abstract domain definition)
- [x] Handling of undefined, local, nonlocal, and global variables
- [ ] Handling nondeterminism inside an `if` branch (what if we don't know the truth value
      of the question made to `if`) (almost complete)
- [ ] Basic support of `numpy` arrays (in progress)
- [x] Basic Function support (only `*args`)
- [ ] Basic support for `list`s
- [ ] Basic support for `tuple`s
- [ ] Basic support of `numpy` operations (addition, multiplication, ... requires checking
      broadcasting)
- [ ] Basic support for `class`es (objects are consider all immutable)
- [ ] Full Function support (`*args`, `**kargs`, `kwonlyargs` and other stuff)
- [ ] Full support of `int`, `float` and `bool` variables, and their operations
- [ ] Full support of a subset `numpy` functions

## Why is this all written in python 3.6? ##

Pytropos only works with Python 3.6 or newer. But, why not Python 2?

It's time people to move on! Python 2 is an amazing tool, but it was announced some many
years now that the core team will stop supporting it in some years. Now we have Python 3,
but it seems that too much code is still written to work in Python 2 too, which means that
we cannot write in the style of Python 3. Well, let's move on.

PS: supporting two Python versions is a lot of work! Python 2 and Python 3 differ in a lot
of subtle ways: scopes, primitive data types, behaivour of builtin functions, ...

## Development ##

Create and enter enviroment:

    python3 -m venv venv-env3
    source venv-env3/bin/activate

Install requirements:

    pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
    pip install -r git_requirements.txt
    pip install argparse

Configure git hooks:

    git config --local core.hooksPath "git-hooks"

Pre- and post-commit hooks are in place to regenerate the documentation just before
commiting. If you want to disable temporarily the automatic regeneration create a file
named `no_docs_generation` on root:

    touch no_docs_generation

## Run tests ##

    paver test_all

We use [hypothesis](hypothesis) for property-based testing. If you want to see the
statistics of the tests generated by hypothesis run:

    paver test --hypothesis-show-statistics

[hypothesis]: https://github.com/HypothesisWorks/hypothesis/

To see test coverage of code:

    paver coverage

## Contributing ##

This project is part of the work for my master thesis.

You're welcome to help, I'll be glad to hear some other voices about this project.

## References ##

Ortin, Francisco, J. Baltasar G. Perez-Schofield, and Jose M. Redondo. 2015. "Towards a
  Static Type Checker for Python." In European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming
  (ECOOP), Scripts to Programs Workshop, STOP, 15:1–2.

Siek, Jeremy G., and Walid Taha. 2006. "Gradual Typing for Functional Languages." In
  Scheme and Functional Programming Workshop, 6:81–92.

Cousot, Patrick, and Radhia Cousot. 1977. "Abstract Interpretation: A Unified Lattice
  Model for Static Analysis of Programs by Construction or Approximation of Fixpoints." In
  Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming
  Languages, 238–252. POPL ’77. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
  https://doi.org/10.1145/512950.512973.
